Ottawa police shocked, struck, kicked Black man in case of mistaken identity
Video shows forceful arrest after foot chase in Orléans in February
Kane Niyondagara was walking home from a Starbucks in Ottawa's east end when he heard the sirens.
He turned around and, according to his description of what happened to him on the morning of Feb. 16, saw police officers with weapons pointed at him on Innes Road.
"Hands up," they ordered. He obeyed.
"Get on your knees," he remembers one officer calling.
But Niyondagara, 27, hadn't done anything wrong. He dropped his hands and shrugged, as if to ask why. He looked at the sidewalk under his feet and said he was afraid of being "brutally arrested" against the hard concrete.
"They just kept screaming to get on the ground," he said. "As I was really scared, I didn't get on the ground. I just waited."
He waited, he said, until a police officer came too close. Then he ran.
The Ottawa Police Service (OPS) won't say much about that encounter or what followed, except to explain that it was all a case of mistaken identity.
Niyondagara, who is Black, said he was shocked with a stun gun, pinned down, struck in the face and handcuffed before police realized their mistake. Parts of the incident were captured on video by a bystander who shared it with CBC News.
Niyondagara said police would later ask if he knew anyone called "Gibriil" — a stranger whose name matches a wanted murder suspect who is also Black.
CBC has confirmed Niyondagara does not have a criminal record.
The case comes just weeks after Toronto police admitted misconduct for shocking a Black university student with a stun gun and kneeing him in the neck in another case of mistaken identity.
In Ottawa, 2022 statistics from the city's police board show Black people made up one-quarter of those against whom police use force, and 17 per cent of those against whom officers discharge stun guns, even though just eight per cent of the city's population is Black.
Niyondagara believes race played a factor in the way he was treated that morning. He's now sharing his story because he wants justice and accountability.
'I felt the shock'
Niyondagara said as he ran east along Innes Road, a police car raced forward and almost hit him. He said he stopped at a red light, pressed the button and waited for it to turn green.
"As I was waiting, I saw the police cars and everybody that was behind me catch up with me, get out of the cars, try to talk to me, just to tell me they were going to Tase me if I kept running," he said.
"I was like, 'Why? Why would you Tase me? What did I do?'" he added. "Nobody told me."
According to Niyondagara, he turned around and then felt a sharp pain in his back.
"I felt the shock," he said. "I smelled something, but it did not stop me from running away. I just pulled out the needle of the Taser out of my back and kept running."
He kept running toward his home on Prestwick Drive, but didn't get much farther. Zak Boudreau saw what happened next from his home across the street, near Summerlands Crescent.
"I heard sirens, so I looked out the window and then I saw a cop car stop, a gentleman walking with his hands up, and then the cops tackled him to the ground," Boudreau said.
He turned on the video recorder on his phone.
The video shows three police officers on top of a man. One can be seen forcing his knee into the man's back. He does it at least twice more, though not as hard as the first time. A fourth officer then enters the frame and forces the man's face down into the snow.
Niyondagara said it was hard to breathe with so many knees pressed into his back. The snow made it much worse, as his face was pushed into the frozen ground.
"I was just trying to blow the snow away … so I could breathe properly," he said.
'They kept hitting him'
Niyondagara said he was again shocked with a stun gun while on the ground, though Boudreau's brief video does not capture that. OPS will neither confirm nor deny to CBC that officers used conducted energy weapons during the chase and altercation.
But an ambulance call report from the Ottawa Paramedic Service confirms that they did, citing "officers on the scene."
"Police chased the patient and ended up Tasing him in the back but the probes did not go in properly," according to the report. It does not reveal where the weapon was used or how many times.
The same report also confirms much of Boudreau's description and the events in his video, except to say that Niyondagara "fell on his back" instead of being tackled. It says he was "punched in the head by an officer and was held down by more officers" and "received knee kicks on the right side of his body."
Niyondagara said he fell on the ground to protect himself and then an officer jumped on him.
Paramedics conducted a physical examination and recorded that Niyondagara had a "minor puncture wound" consistent with an "electronic probe device."
Boudreau and Niyondagara have different estimates of how long he was pinned on that spot, but both agreed it lasted for several minutes.
Niyondagara said he wasn't resisting or even moving much while on the ground.
"I was just waiting for the handcuffs," he said.
Boudreau said he saw no signs of resistance from Niyondagara.
"He didn't really seem to be struggling at all, but they kept on hitting him, screaming at him," Boudreau said. "It looked really aggressive."
He specified that the hitting did not last through the entire episode.
"It's not like they were beating him up the whole time," Boudreau said.

