As more people choose the single life, researchers ask: are they happier?
Psychologists say that focusing on yourself is more likely to lead to a happy life
Nastasha Streiling says even though she'd like a relationship, she's happy being single.
The 28-year-old, who lives in Victoria, says she's "not going to be with someone unless it enhances things."
She's part of a growing number of single people in Canada and around the world.
"There seems to be evidence that around the world people are staying single longer and sometimes staying single permanently," said Geoff MacDonald, a psychologist at the University of Toronto whose lab studies the well-being of single people.
In Canada, there's been a drop in the number of people living together as couples from 1981 to 2021, according to Statistics Canada.
Researchers say this drop in the number of couples is due to societal shifts. Data shows there are fewer people getting married, and some divorced people are choosing to remain single.
"I also think that those trends in divorce made people think very carefully about what it is that they do want in their life," said Yuthika Girme, an associate professor who studies relationships and singlehood at Simon Fraser University (SFU). "And if they do want to be in a relationship, who their potential partner is."
She also says some people are choosing to delay romantic relationships to focus on their careers.
Are single people unhappy?
For years, many studies on singlehood focused specifically on relationship status in comparison to well-being.
"I think what happened is that it gave rise to people making assumptions and stereotypes about single people," said Girme, who leads the Singlehood Experiences and Complexities Underlying Relationships Lab at SFU.
She says her own research as well as MacDonald's looks into the well-being of singles in order to better understand the role their relationship statuses play in their happiness.
For example, this 2023 study showed there are other factors that impact a single person's overall life satisfaction and feelings about being single. The 2021 study surveyed more than 900 single people around the world from different cultural backgrounds and sexual orientations.
MacDonald's research found that those who are most unhappy about being single and who have the lowest overall satisfaction with their lives are people who crave connection. He describes them as "anxiously attached" individuals.
Those who are happiest with being single tend to be more independent people who are comfortable being alone, he said.
"There's actually not a lot of difference between the kinds of people who are happy single, and the kinds of people who are happy in relationships."
MacDonald said the people with the highest life satisfaction are those who are happy to be single but are also open to being in a relationship. He described them as "emotionally stable" people who like to connect with others.
"Our data suggests that it's not so much that getting into a relationship makes people happy. There's probably better evidence that happy people are more likely to get into relationships."
